---
navigationLabel: about
---

# about me

## then

Back in 2005 after graduating Leeds Metropolitan University with 1st Class honours in MultiMedia technology I got my
first job for a little design and development studio called ward404.

Our main projects were building eCards for record labels such as EMI, Warner and Virgin Records, we'd take album artwork
and design and build Flash micro-sites to help promote album or single sales. These micro-sites would typically involve
an intro animation hook, showcase the 30 second trailer and an audio preview player.

A little while later Rich Media burst on to the scene so we transferred all of our learnings from eCards over to Rich
Media advertisements.

This shift in design and development landed me a job in advertising and I worked for Play (M&C Saatchi) from 2008 where
I continued to design and develop Flash Rich Media campaigns and picked up multiple awards for my work... including a
[D&AD](https://www.dandad.org/awards/professional/2010/graphic-design/17943/one-in-seven/) for an interactive _out of
home_ sound driven animation to promote RNID. During this period I was also awarded a promotion and managed my first
team of two.

After a couple of years at Play in 2010 I went freelance and worked at various London creative agencies including CHI &
Partners, RKCRY&R and BBH to name a few. I then started a contract with TBMWA (MAL) which is Apple's creative agency...
naturally they couldn't use Flash for their online campaigns so we developed HTML / JavaScript and later CSS methods to
bring animation to the iPhone.

Spotting a gap in the market for HTML Rich Media campaigns in 2012 I co-founded and ran **award** winning digital
production agency Super natural, we grew from a team of two to a team of ten and continued to work with top London
creative agencies and clients including Channel 4's 4Creative, ITV Creative, Netflix and adam&eve among others. We
developed engaging and delightful online campaigns and micro-sites, and picked up a few awards along the way including a
**BAFTA** for our [Digital Creativity](http://www.bafta.org/sites/default/files/uploads/baftatvcraft1516winnerslist.pdf)
work on Channel 4's Humans. During this time I was a hands on designer, developer and oversaw all creative and technical
output, trained and mentored members of the creative teams and engaged with clients to develop creative ideas.

In 2016 I felt the time was right to move on and with the rise of JavaScript frameworks I decided to take a leap into
React application development.

## now

Since then I’ve been contracting and love React, user interface development and data visualization. I have good
JavaScript knowledge but wouldn't class myself as a hardcore JavaScript engineer. I do believe in excellent code quality
but given my background I also understand UX and deeply care about how the final product looks and feels, a quality that
is often revered by product managers.

My primary focus over the last few years has been building React Component Libraries and developing Design Systems using
Storybook and styled-components to help companies streamline their Frontend workflows but sadly in React application
land so much of my work is for internal client tools and can't be shared.

In 2018 I discovered [Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/) and immediately fell in love with the developer experience and
feel it's a brilliant middle ground between using a framework like React and brining back some of that internet joy we
lost when websites became _web applications_

I've been actively developing multiple Gatsby themes and plugins, all of which are Open-source and can be seen on
GitHub: [https://github.com/PaulieScanlon](https://github.com/PaulieScanlon)

More recently I've become quite interested in technical writing and have had multiple articles published on well known
sites and blogs such as [Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/contributors/paul-scanlon),
[Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/blog/2020/07/16/add-playful-animated-svg-reactions-to-a-gatsby-blog/) and
[CSS-Tricks](https://css-tricks.com/roll-your-own-comments-with-gatsby-and-faunadb/)

I’m a huge fan of process and have worked with some great developers in some very well organized engineering teams. I’m
familiar with and enjoy agile working processes but...

<Text sx={{ color: 'text', display: 'inline' }}>After all is said and done </Text>
<Text sx={{ color: 'primary', display: 'inline' }}>structure </Text>+<Text
  sx={{ color: 'secondary', display: 'inline' }}
>
  {' '}
  order{' '}
</Text>=<Text sx={{ color: 'success', display: 'inline' }}> fun</Text>
